SYNOPSIS

Read a trajectory and return a histogram of the radius of gyration of a selection.

DESCRIPTION

This tool computes the radius of gyration for a selection of atoms for each frame of a provided multi-trajectory. By default this selection is treated as one group, but if --by-molecule is thrown then the selection will be split by connectivity. The skip, stride, and range options operate on the multi-trajectory as they would for other LOOS tools. The time-series option specifies a file to write a timeseries of the radius of gyrations to. If none is specified then no time-series is written. The num-bins, min-bin, and max-bin options determine the extent and bin-width of the histogram, which is written to stdout. The histogram contains both the probability per bin, and the cumulative probability.

EXAMPLE

rad-gyr -k 100 -n 20 -m 5 -M 25 --by-molecule model.pdb traj1.dcd traj2.dcd traj3.dcd

This will concatenate traj1, traj2, and traj3 into one virtual trajectory, skip the first 100 frames of each, and then histogram the radius of gyration of all the atoms in each of the molecules in the model provided with the trajectories, computing their radii of gyration and summing over them. Note that this would be nonsensical if the molecules in the model were not multiple copies of the same molecule, since all such Rgyr will be collated into one histogram at the end. Using selection to pick a subsystem of interest makes more sense in the context of most analyses of a solute.

POTENTIAL COMPLICATIONS

This tool uses splitByMolecule applied to the whole system, which is then subset on a per molecule basis by the selection string provided. This means that if you had a three chain protein and you selected 'name == \"CA\"', you'd get three different groups of alpha carbons, each of which would be used to calculate a separate radius of gyration. Most of the time this is probably what you want, but if you wanted to use your selection to break up whatever is in your system into fragments, then track each of those fragments separately, throw the --by-fragment flag instead. Doing so flips the order in which the selection string and the call to splitByMolecule are applied (in the by-fragments case the selection is performed first, then the splitting by connectivity) to the model provided. Thus if you provided a discontinuous selection like the above for alpha carbons, then you'd be tracking the radii of gyration of all those discontinuous fragments as though they were separate molecules.


It's also worth saying that this tool requires connectivity if either of the splitting flags are thrown. You could use PyLOOS to add connectivity to your system by reading it in, adding connectivity (for example, with findBonds) then writing it back out again. Caution is advised, though; if you can use a model that has connectivity from a better source, like a force field for example (for example, prmtops and psfs both have this) you should prefer that to distance-based workarounds like findBonds.

Finally, if you are using one of the molecule splittings, know that you will be accumulating all the various radii of gyration your selection is tracking for each molecule it found in the histogram the tool reports. This, again, is probably what you want. However, it could produce subtly screwy results if, for example, you were tracking a molecule you did not believe you were tracking, or if a molecule you thought you were tracking was actually being treated as two molecules. As with all LOOS tools, it's a good idea to use model-select and the pdb option to visualize what atoms any selection string under consideration tracks before applying a tool that will give necessarily opaque output from a goofed up selection. This warning is included here because it might be particularly hard to spot an erroneous selection in a histogram of a complicated system, like all the lipids in a membrane. 