SYNOPSIS

Calculate the RMSD between all pairs of frames from two different sets of trajectories.

DESCRIPTION

This tool calculates the pair-wise RMSD between each frame pair from two sets of multi-trajectories. The jth structure from set B and the ith structure from set A are aligned, then the RMSD is calculated. This is stored in a matrix, i.e. R(j, i) = d(S_i, S_j).  The block-structure is indicative of sets of similar conformations. The matrix is not diagonal unless one or more of the trajectories in set A matches one or more of the trajectories in set B (in which case that section of the outputted matrix will match what other all-to-all rmsd tools would return for that trajectory or trajectories alone). The presence (or lack thereof) of multiple cross-peaks is diagnostic of the sampling quality of a simulation.  Cross-peaks between sub-blocks indicates similar conformations in multiple trajectories. This tool is particularly useful for comparing trajectories representing the same system at different positions along a reaction coordinate.

The requested subset for each frame is cached in memory for better performance. If the memory used by the cache gets too large, your machine may swap and dramatically slowdown.  The tool will try to warn you if this is a possibility. To use less memory, subsample the trajectory by using --skip or --stride, or use subsetter to pre-process the trajectory. Be wary of writing selection strings that could conceivably include many atoms (such as solvent atoms) for a trajectory, as in addition to being expensive it will also produce confusing and incoherent results. 

If subsetter is used to pre-process trajectories to a subset of atoms that match over trajectories originally created with different systems, they can then be analyzed for similarities in that subset using this tool with some additional ease, since trajectories of one time can be kept in set A and trajectories of the other type can be kept in set B. Expanding this to more types can be done pairwise, although there is some point where the combinatorics and the postprocessing requirements may make this not worth it. 

This tool can be run in parallel with multiple threads for performance. The --threads option controls how many threads are used.  The default is 1 (non-parallel).  Setting it to 0 will use as many threads as possible.  Note that if LOOS was built using a multi-threaded math library,then some care should be taken in how many threads are used for this tool, though it is unlikely that there will be a conflict.

This tool can compute some basic statistics about the matrix produced, and can also be asked not to return it, for convenience in certain situations (they can be very large if comparisons are being made between many trajectories and/or many frames). If stats are requested but no cutoff is give, then the program calculates the maximum distance between any two frames, as well as the average. If a cutoff is given, then the maximum, average, and variance are reported. The number of frames below the given cutoff is also reported, along with a total number of frames compared (so that one might calculate a 'fractional overlap' using these values).

EXAMPLES    

rms-overlap --set-A sysA.sim1.dcd sysA.sim2.dcd --set-B sysB.sim3.dcd sysB.sim4.dcd model.pdb > rmsd.asc

This example uses all backbone heavy atoms and every frame from each trajectory in set A to compare to every frame in set B. 

rms-overlap --threads=8 --set-A sysA.sim1.dcd sysA.sim2.dcd --set-B sysB.sim3.dcd sysB.sim4.dcd model.pdb > rmsd.asc

This example uses all backbone heavy atoms and every frame in the trajectories, run in parallel with 8 threads of execution.  

rms-overlap --selection backbone --skip=50 --stride=10 --set-A sysA.sim1.dcd sysA.sim2.dcd --set-B sysB.sim3.dcd sysB.sim4.dcd model.pdb > rmsd.asc
This example uses the backbone atoms, and skips the first 50 frames from each trajectory,and only takes every 10th subsequent frame from each trajectory.

rms-overlap -c 2.5 -N 1 -A sysA.sim1.dcd sysA.sim2.dcd sysA.sim3.dcd -B sysB.sim1.dcd sysB.sim2.dcd model.pdb > stats.out

This example will compute the RMSDs between all frames in set A and all frames in set B, but will not write the matrix out to stdout. It will calculate the statistics described in the cutoff section above, then write them to stdout where they are redirected to stats.out.



SEE ALSO 

rmsds, rmsd2ref

Usage- rms-overlap [options] model
